cansav09/intro to R (#21)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: intro_to_R_tidyverse/intro_to_r.Rmd

---
title: "Intro to R"
output:   
  html_notebook: 
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
---

**CCDL 2019**

### This RMarkdown takes you through the basics of R  

*For more comprehensive tutorials:*  
  - For a tutorial on R, RStudio and RMarkdown: https://ismayc.github.io/rbasics-book/  
  - [Datacamp](https://www.datacamp.com/) has lots of good tutorials for R and 
    the intro ones are free: 
  

> This html is made from an [RMarkdown file](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/articles_intro.html). 

Author: So take this explanation of an Rmd out of here then?

> This html is made from an [RMarkdown file](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/articles_intro.html). 

Reviewer: The "This html" bit at the very least

the output from that code. 
Rmds also have a lot of options and features for what that output looks like and 
what it includes. 

## The Basics  
R remembers what you tell it and stores assigned values in it's environment. 
In RStudio, you will see what R has in it's environment in the "environment" panel.
Here let's assign the value of `1` to `x` using the assignment operator: `<-`.
```{r Basic assignment}
x <- 1
```

Now R will print out `1` if we tell it `x`.
```{r Recall}
x
```

Use the print function to more explicitly ask R to recall what x is
```{r print}
print(x)
```

R will ignore what you say (allowing you to make comments on your code) if you 
put hashtags/pound signs.
```{r Comments}
# This is important because you should always have comments to explain your code
```

Can't remember what values you have assigned to things in your environment? 
Use the function `ls` to list everything in the current environment. 
Just like in math, 
*functions* are things that take input, transform or otherwise do something with this input, and then give you output. 
In R, functions take input through *arguments* within their parantheses. 

> If the arguments don't make sense, you will get an *error* that will try to tell 

Reviewer: If the arguments "don't make sense" you'll get an error? Well, possibly. Depends on the error handling of the function in question. What does it mean for something to not make sense? An argument not making sense = being inconsistent with your intentions and not making sense = not an acceptable value (e.g., `integer` vs. `character`) are very different things.

> If the arguments don't make sense, you will get an *error* that will try to tell 

Author: I'm just trying to explain things very generally and the idea that you should check the documentation and source code if  you get an error message. Maybe I'll just say something like that.

you why R can't do what you asked. 
Use a `?` mark before a function name to bring up the help page for that function
so you can see how it's supposed to be used. 
Or just search for the function by name in the *help bar* in RStudio.
```{r Environment}
# It will tell us that our object "x" is in the environment
ls()

> 

Reviewer 2: ![screen shot 2019-02-01 at 10 58 49 am](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15315514/52134001-94d79780-2610-11e9-99c3-43e6ea03275b.png)

This is what it showed me when I opened up the files. It would be confusing to see all these variables which weren't assigned visibly prior to this.

Author: That's because I forgot to run it again after I cleaned out the environment from other things I was doing. I will make sure it doesn't have that in the final version.

# Let's look at the info for the ls() function:
?ls
```

Based on the info we saw when we ran `ls()`, what would happen if we got rid of the
pound sign and tried to run this following line?:
```{r }

> # print(y)

Author: ? What's the purpose of this?

> # print(y)

Reviewer: If you do https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/21#discussion_r253066599, then using `print()` here doesn't make sense to me. What is your intention here? To have the error happen?

> # print(y)

Author: Trying to pull together the ideas of interpreting `ls()` output, how R stores things in it's environment, as well as how to interpret error messages. I've changed it so it will print the error.

```

Base R (R without any extra frills from *packages*) knows how to do arithmetic. 
Feel free to try out division, exponents, and multiplication.   
*Hint:* `/`  `^`  `*` 
```{r Arithmetic}
# Addition:
x + 5
```

## Data Types  
R classifies objects as different data types. 
We'll go through examples of each so it's clear what these are; here's a brief
explanation of each:  
  - *Numeric* : Numbers like 1.3333 or 1  
  - *Integer* : Numbers without decimals   
  - *Character* : Things with quotes around them; strings of characters  
  - *Factor* : Sets of variables that R will assign an factor levels to  
  - *Logical* : An object where 0 means FALSE and 1 means TRUE  

Based on these categories, what kind of data structure do you think `x` is right
now? 
If we want to find out about the object `x` data type and structure, we can use 
the function `str` to find out. 
```{r Data structures}

> # Ask R to tell you what type of data structure "x" is

Reviewer 2: Data Types and Data Structures are used interchangeably. Maybe refer to it as `Data Structures` throughout, if that doesn't conflict with another concept in R?

Reviewer 2: Just got down to the `Data Structure` section. Perhaps make the distinction a little more apparent? I'm not sure but it's a little confusing.

Author: I've added some more up front definitions of *types* v *structures* hopefully that helps.

str(x)
```

So x is currently numeric ("num"). 
```{r Characters}
# Let's make x something else
x <- "x"

# What do you suppose this will say now? 
str(x)
```

Quotes make it a character even if its a number in the quote: 
```{r Characters continued}
x <- "1"
str(x)
```
Let's say we change our minds and we don't want `x` to be known as `1` in our 
environment anymore. 
We can either assign `x` as being `NULL` or we can use the function `rm`.
```{r Removal}
# Remove x from the environment
rm(x)

# Take a look at our environment. Is x there? 
ls()
```

Let's bring x back so we can try to get rid of it's assignment a different way:
```{r}
# Reassign x
x <- "1"

# Make x NULL
x <- NULL

# Take a look at our environment. It's technically still there, but it's empty.
ls()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a sub-heading 'Vectors' here?

So to avoid R or us getting confused we'll call this `colorz`. 
```{r}
# Let's make a color vector
colorz <- c("red", "blue", "red", "yellow", "blue")
```
  
Let's take a look at our vector `colorz` and what it looks like.
```{r}
str(colorz)
```
 Oh no! We wanted to make a factor vector but R thinks that we want a character
vector. That's because R will, by default, assume this is a character string. 

But what's the difference anyway?...
  
Let's take a look at our object another way using the function `summary`.
Notice that if we use `summary` on a this character vector, it doesn't give us
terribly meaningful information about how many times each color is repeated 
because R sees this as a character string and doesn't know to look at the data
like we want it to. 
```{r Summary}
summary(colorz)
```

If we want `colorz` to be a factor we need to tell R to treat it as such. 
If you want to try to tell R to reinterpret something as a `factor`, you need to 
use the function `as.factor`
*Note* that every character type has it's own `as.___` function eg (`as.numeric`, 
`as.character`, etc.).
```{r Coerce Factor}
# Let's turn our character vector into a factor

> colorz <- as.factor(colorz)

Author: I didn't wanna get things to bogged down in the details of how to deal with each at this point. But we can...

> colorz <- as.factor(colorz)

Reviewer: The fact that these are in alphabetical order by default can be a tricky and important point for working with factors in R.

# Character strings that are the same will be included in the same level
# What do you think this will give us now that we've turned this into a factor?
summary(colorz)
```

*Logical* vectors are ones that can help you find out what data meets 
different criteria.
You can create logical vectors from using *logical statements* on other vectors.
`0` means `FALSE` and `1` means `TRUE`

In R, there are a few types of logical expressions: 
  `==` : Is this equal? (Note that this is different interpretation than a single
         `=` which is generally used for arguments in functions or also R will 
         interpret as an assignment)
  `!=` : Is this not equal? An exclamation point reverses the previous statement.
  `>` : Is this greater than? 
  `<` : Is this lesser than? 
  `>=` : Is this greater than or equal to?
  `<=` : Is this lesser than or equal to?

> 

Reviewer 2: ![screen shot 2019-02-01 at 10 58 49 am](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15315514/52135246-5ee7e280-2613-11e9-9def-b84cf81aae74.png)

Each operator doesn't on a newline :(

Author: Fixed that.

For example, if we want to see which of the words in our `words` vector are 
the words `"dog"`, we'll construct a statement: 
```{r Logical colorz}
# This will print out a vector of the same length as "words" but with TRUE or 
# FALSE at each position in the vector. 
words == "dog"
```

For numeric values, we can use greater than or equal signs. 
```{r Logical nums}
nums >= 2
```

Note that when it comes to logical statements, factors can be referenced by their
character strings: 
```{r Logical factor 2}
colorz != "red"
```

...or by their numeric level if you coerce the factor to numeric with `as.numeric`:
```{r Logical factor 1}
# Let's check out what numeric levels are assigned to our colors with "levels"
levels(colorz)

# Now let's get any levels greater than 2
as.numeric(colorz) < 2
```

## Data Structures
Brief explanations of the data structures:  

>   - A *Vector* is one dimensional collection of data that is all of the same type  

Reviewer: Let's also put these in code blocks.

>   - A *Vector* is one dimensional collection of data that is all of the same type  

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't all the Vector stuff come after this?

>   - A *Vector* is one dimensional collection of data that is all of the same type  

Author: I briefly introduce vectors earlier so I can explain the other stuff, but I wanted to remind them it's a structure type. IDK what's the most easy-to-follow order.

```{r Special dataframe things}
# dataframes store column names and row names 
df$nums
# We'll do fancier dataframe manipulations in the next Rmd so hold tight!
```

What if we want to store all of our object in one big object? 
We can't do that with data frames because not all of these are the same length 
or dimensions. 
This is where `lists` come in handy.
Lists do not care about data type or data structure, but let you store whatever
you want in one big object. 
```{r}
# Let's remind ourselves of what objects we've made so far: 
ls()
```

Now let's make one crazy list with various objects of different dimensions and
types using the function `list`!
```{r Lists}
variety.list <- list(df, sq.matrix, colorz, x)

# Let's take a look at this list 
str(variety.list)
```

How do we extract things from this weird list? We need to use brackets again. 
```{r  Single bracket}
# This will show us our dataframe in the first spot as a singular item
variety.list[1]
```

However, if you want to the thing in that position of the list, you need to use 
the double bracket. 
```{r Double Bracket}
# This however will give us the data.frame in this spot in the list. 
variety.list[[1]]
```

> 

Author: Talked about this in person and I added more explanation and examples to try to explain this better.

If the arguments given are inconsistent or the function built doesn't know how 
to handle what you gave it, you will get an *error* that will try to tell you 
why R can't do what you asked. 
To understand what the *error* might be pointing to, you should check the 
*function's* documentation to see how the author intended it to be used.
Use a `?` mark before a function name to bring up the documentation for that 
function.
Alternatively, you can just search for the function by name in the *help bar*
in RStudio in the lower right corner.
```{r Environment}
# It will tell us that our object "x" is in the environment
ls()

# Let's look at the info for the ls() function:
?ls
```

Based on the info we saw when we ran `ls()`, what do you suppose will happen if 
we ask for R to print `y`?
```{r error=TRUE}
y
```
This is R's way of telling us that it doesn't know what y is because it's not 
in it's environment. 
  
Base R (R without any extra frills from *packages*) knows how to do arithmetic. 
Feel free to try out division, exponents, and multiplication.   
*Hint:* `/`  `^`  `*` 
```{r Arithmetic}
# Addition:
x + 5
```

## Data Types 

> R has to know how to treat different objects eg. it wouldn't make sense to try 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
R has to know how to treat different objects. For example, it wouldn't make sense to try 
```

mark in front `?functionName`).
Using the `str()` function and going through the documentation of a function 
should help you troubleshoot most problems.

R classifies objects as different data types. 
Here's a brief explanation of each but don't get too worried about understanding
these now; we will go through examples of each.  

*Data types*:  
  - *Numeric* : Numbers like 1.3333 or 1  
  - *Integer* : Numbers without decimals   
  - *Character* : Things with quotes around them; strings of characters  
  - *Factor* : Sets of variables that R will assign an factor levels to  
  - *Logical* : An object where 0 means FALSE and 1 means TRUE  

Let's go through examples to explain each of these. 
 
Based on this info, what kind of data structure do you think `x` is right
now? 
If we want to find out about the object `x` data type and structure, we can use 
the function `str` to find out. 
```{r Data structures}
# Ask R to tell you what type of data structure "x" is
str(x)
```

So x is currently numeric (`num`). 
Now let's turn `x` into something else.
```{r Characters}
# Let's make x something else
x <- "x"

# What do you suppose this will say now? 
str(x)
```

> Note that quotes make it a character even if its a number in the quote: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that quotes make it a character even if it's a number in the quote: 
```

```{r Characters continued}
x <- "1"
str(x)
```

Let's say we change our minds and we don't want `x` to be known as `1` in our 
environment anymore. 
We can either assign `x` as being `NULL` or we can use the function `rm`.
```{r Removal}
# Remove x from the environment
rm(x)

# Take a look at our environment. Is x there? 
ls()
```

Let's bring x back so we can try to get rid of it's assignment a different way:
```{r}
# Reassign x
x <- "1"

# Make x NULL
x <- NULL

# Take a look at our environment. It's technically still there, but it's empty.
ls()
```

Let's store a bunch of things together in different types of *vectors*: 

> *Vectors* are one dimensional and contain multiple pieces of data (more on that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Vectors* are one dimensional and contain multiple data points (more on that 
```
data being plural and all :see_no_evil: (don't hate me)

```

Note that if these vectors were not conveniently all the same length, we could 
not put them in a `data.frame` together.  
```{r}
str(df)
# Also note that "obs" are rows and "variables" are the columns in a data.frame
```

Also note that the `data.frame` function makes strings a factor by default,
unless you tell it not to. 
So let's remake this `data.frame`, but tell R not to do that with one of the 
arguments for the `data.frame` function. 
```{r Data frames cont. }
# Let's make a data frame from our previously created vectors but tell R not to
# turn strings into factors!
df <- data.frame(nums, words, color_vector, stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
str(df)
# Note that with the argument `stringsAsFactors` now our words variable remains 
# a character vector as it was before. 
```

Now that we have a nice `data.frame` and other objects to play with in our 
environment; let's play around with it and extract pieces of it. 
```{r Subsetting Indices}
# Let's say we only want to see what's in the first row and first column of this
# data.frame. We can subset data structures by using brackets. 
df[1, 1]

# Note that you can do this same thing to matrices: 
sq_matrix[3, 3]

> 

Reviewer: Can we add one that uses `:` -- such as `sq_matrix[, 1:3]`? This has an added benefit in that it demonstrates that all rows will be selected.

Author: Added it.

that is in this list. 
```{r Double Bracket}
# This however will give us the data.frame in this spot in the list. 
variety_list[[1]]

# Let's look at the structure of this after we've 'extracted' the data.frame
# from the list with the double brackets. 
str(variety_list[[1]])
```

To further clarify the difference between the double and single bracket, note 
that with a single bracket we can't use the `data.frame` as usual.
R tells us `NULL` if we try to reference the column `$color_vector` because it 
doesn't recognize it as a `data.frame`, but instead thinks of it as a `list` item.
But, with the double bracket we can play with our `data.frame` the same way as before: 
```{r Subset list and df}
# Single bracket: can't use the data.frame
variety_list[1]$color_vector

# Double bracket: can use the data.frame
variety_list[[1]]$color_vector
```

## Some last bits of advice
*Why are data types and structures important?*
Functions are typically built to work with certain object structures and types.
A function's documentation should tell you what type and structure it will expect
as input (remember you can see a function's documentation by putting a question

> mark in front `?functionName`).

Reviewer: Note distinction between `?` and `??` here

Note that the documentation will also tell you about the default *arguments*
that the function has. 
Knowing what the default *arguments* of a function are can also be helplful in 

> your troublshooting a problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your troubleshooting a problem.
```
